[CIT-539] Add a tutorial how to write a new sm-plugin (#448)
thin-edge/thin-edge.io: docs/src/tutorials/write-my-software-management-plugin.md

# Write my software management plugin

**thin-edge.io** provides Software Management plugins natively for APT (Debian).
However, there are many package management systems in the world,
and you may want to have a plugin that is suitable for your device.
For such a demand, we provide **Software Management Plugin API** to write a custom Software Management plugin.

In this tutorial, we will look into the **Software Management Plugin API**,
and learn how to write your own plugin with a docker plugin shell script example.

## Create a plugin

Create a _docker_ file in the directory _/etc/tedge/sm-plugins/_. 
A plugin must be an executable file and located in the directory.

Filename: /etc/tedge/sm-plugins/docker

```shell
#!/bin/bash

set -e

COMMAND="$1"
IMAGE_NAME="$2"
VERSION_FLAG="$3"
IMAGE_TAG="$4"

case "$COMMAND" in
    list)

>         sudo docker image list --format '{"name":"{{.Repository}}","version":"{{.Tag}}"}'

Author: Yes, I should write that tedge-agent user executes a plugin script with sudo.

        ;;
    install)

>         sudo docker pull $IMAGE_NAME:$IMAGE_TAG

Reviewer: ![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/75632179/134650844-ad3a9982-afa2-47bf-beb2-1c58556ab234.png)

        ;;
    remove)
        sudo docker rmi $IMAGE_NAME:$IMAGE_TAG
        ;;
    prepare)
        ;;
    finalize)
        ;;
    update-list)
        exit 1
        ;;
esac
exit 0
```

> Note: the filename will be used as a plugin type to report the software list to a cloud.
> If you name it `docker.sh`, you will see `docker.sh` as a plugin type in cloud.

If you execute `./docker list`, you will see this kind of output.

```
{"name":"alpine","version":"3.14"}
{"name":"eclipse-mosquitto","version":"2.0-openssl"}
```

The Software Management Agent runs executable plugins with a special argument, like `list`.
Let's call the pre-defined argument such as `list`, `install`, and `remove` a **command** here. 
As you can see from this example, a plugin should be an executable file 
that accepts the commands and outputs to stdout and stderr in the defined JSON format. 

> Hence, you can implement a plugin in your preferred language.

Reviewer 2: This is a key point. This is why it's better to say it in the introduction.

Author: Added it also to the beginning.

Reviewer 2: I don't see where.

Author: Line 7.

`prepare` -> `update-list` or [`install`, `remove`] ->`finalize`

> Note: There is no guarantee of the order between `install` and `remove`.
> If you need a specific order, use `update-list` command instead.

In the following sections, we will dive into each command and other rules deeply. 

## Input, Output, and Errors

Before we dive into each command, we should clarify the basic rules of plugins.

### Input

The command arguments themselves and further arguments must be given from **stdin**.

### Output

The **stdout** and **stderr** of the process running a plugin command are captured by the Software Management Agent.

### Exit status

The exit status of plugins are interpreted by sm-agent as follows:
- **0**: success.
- **1**: usage. The command arguments cannot be interpreted, and the command has not been launched.
- **2**: failure. The command failed and there is no point to retry.
- **3**: retry. The command failed but might be successful later (for instance, when the network will be back).

## List

The `list` command is responsible to return the list of the installed software modules.

Rules:

- This command takes no arguments.

> - The output must be in JSON format including:

Author: Ah okay, it has to be the JSON lines, I didn't notice it.

  - **name**: the name of the software module, e.g. `mosquitto`.
  This name is the name that has been used to install it and that needs to be used to remove it.
  - **version**: the version currently installed.
  This is a string that can only be interpreted in the context of the plugin.
  
  
Given that your plugin is named `myplugin`, the image name is `mosquitto`, and the version is `1.5.7-1+deb10u1`,
then the Software Management plugin calls

```shell
myplugin list
```

to report the list of software modules installed. `myplugin` should output

```json
{
   "name":"mosquitto",
   "version":"1.5.7-1+deb10u1"
}

> ```

Author: Yeah, as it must be JSON lines, as I wrote above, didn't know that :P

with exit code `0` (successful).

A plugin must return this JSON structure per software module.
In the _docker_ file example, the following command outputs such JSON structures.

```shell
sudo docker image list --format '{"name":"{{.Repository}}","version":"{{.Tag}}"}'
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Here is a good place to add the output of `$ docker list` as an example of jsonlines expected output

## Prepare

The `prepare` command is invoked by the sm-agent before a sequence of install and remove commands.

Rules:

- It takes no argument and no output is expected.
- If the `prepare` command fails,
  then the whole Software Management operation is cancelled.

For many plugins this command will do nothing.
However, if you want nothing in preparation,

> you have to define the command as the first `docker` plugin example.

Reviewer 2: The last sentence is misleading. I would simply say

``` suggestion
For many plugins this command has nothing specific to do, and can simply return with a 0 exit status.
```

  even if all the atomic actions have been successfully completed.

Similar to the `prepare` plugin, you must define the command even if you want nothing in the `finalize` command.

The command can be used in several situations. For example, 
- remove any unnecessary software module after a sequence of actions.
- commit or roll back the sequence of actions.
- restart any processes using the modules,
  e.g. restart the analytics engines if the modules have changed

  
## Install

The `install` command installs a software module, possibly of some expected version.
A plugin must be executable in the below format.

```shell
$ myplugin install NAME [--module-version VERSION] [--file FILE]
```

This command takes 1 mandatory argument and 2 optional arguments with flags.
- **NAME**: the name of the software module to be installed, e.g. `mosquitto`. [Mandatory]
- **VERSION**: the version to be installed. e.g. `1.5.7-1+deb10u1`.
  The version can be blank, so it's recommended to define the behaviour if a version is not provided. 
  For example, always installs the "latest" version if a version is not provided. [Optional]

> - **FILE**: the path to the software to be installed. This feature is coming soon. [Optional]

Reviewer 2: I would remove the note saying that this feature is coming soon.

The installation phase can be failed due to several reasons.
An error must be reported if:
- The module name is unknown.
- There is no version for the module that matches the constraint provided by the `--module-version` option.
- The file content provided by `--file` option:
  - is not in the expected format,
  - doesn't correspond to the software module name,
  - has a version that doesn't match the constraint provided by the `--module-version` option (if any).
- The module cannot be downloaded.
- The module cannot be installed.

At the API level, there is no command to distinguish install or upgrade.

Back to the first _docker.sh_ example,
if the NAME is `mosquitto`, and the VERSION is `1.5.7-1+deb10u1`,
the Software Management Agent calls

```shell
/etc/tedge/sm-plugins/docker.sh install mosquitto --module-version 1.5.7-1+deb10u1

> ```

Reviewer 2: No the agent invoke the command with sudo.

```shell
sudo /etc/tedge/sm-plugins/docker.sh install mosquitto --module-version 1.5.7-1+deb10u1
```

Reviewer 2: There is also an inconsistency with the plugin name `docker.sh` vs `docker`.

Then, the plugin executes

```shell
sudo docker pull mosquitto:1.5.7-1+deb10u1

> ```

Reviewer 2: No sudo here. The plugin is run as root.

but gets passed all software modules to be processed in one command.
This can be needed when an order of processing software modules is relevant.

In other words, you can choose a combination of the `install` or `remove` commands or this `update-list` command up to your requirement.
If you don't want to use `update-list`, the plugin must return `1` like the first _docker_ plugin example.

```shell
case "$COMMAND" in
    ...
    update-list)
        exit 1
        ;;
esac
```

Let's expand the first _docker_ plugin example to use `update-list`.
First, learn what is the input of `update-list`.

The Software Management Agent calls a plugin as below:

```shell
$ myplugin update-list <<EOF
install name1 version1
install name2 "" path2
remove "name 3" version3
remove name4
EOF
```

The point is that it doesn't take any command-line argument, 
but the software action list is sent through **stdin**.

The behaviour of operations `install` and `remove` is same as for original commands `install` and `remove` as [above](#install).

That is equivalent to the use of original commands (`install` and `remove`):

```shell
$ myplugin install name1 --module-version version1

> $ myplugin install name2 --module-path path2

Author: Yes!

    else
        mOperation=${1}
        shift
        mName=${1}
        shift
        mVersion=${1}
        shift
        mPath=${1}
        shift
        echo "info: $mOperation, $mName, $mVersion, $mPath"
        case "$mOperation" in
           install)
            sudo docker pull $mName:$mVersion
            ;;
          remove)
            sudo docker rmi $mName:$mVersion
            ;;
        esac
    fi
}

case "$COMMAND" in
    list)
        sudo docker image list --format '{"name":"{{.Repository}}","version":"{{.Tag}}"}'
        ;;
    install)
        # We use update-list instead
        ;;
    remove)
        # We use update-list instead
        ;;
    prepare)
        ;;
    finalize)
        ;;
    update-list)
        echo "---+++ reading software list +++---"
        while read -r line; do
            eval "moduleArray=($line)";
            read_module "${moduleArray[@]}"
        done
        ;;
esac
exit 0
```

You can find that `install` and `remove` are replaced by `update-list`.
`update-list` should define the behaviour to read line by line for the case `install` and `remove`.

## Project references

**thin-edge.io** provides APT plugin written in Rust.

> You can check out the code from [here](https://github.com/thin-edge/thin-edge.io/tree/main/sm/plugins/tedge_apt_plugin).

Reviewer 2: When available (soon !), it would be good to also add a link to the docker plugin.

# Write my software management plugin

**thin-edge.io** provides Software Management plugins natively for APT (Debian).
However, there are many package management systems in the world,
and you may want to have a plugin that is suitable for your device.

> For such a demand, we provide **Software Management Plugin API**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For such a demand, we provide the **Software Management Plugin API**
```

> to write a custom Software Management plugin in your preferred language.

Reviewer 2: ```
to write a custom Software Management plugin in your preferred programming language.
```

In this tutorial, we will look into the **Software Management Plugin API**,
and learn how to write your own plugin with a docker plugin shell script example.

## Create a plugin

Create a _docker_ file in the directory _/etc/tedge/sm-plugins/_. 

> A plugin must be an executable file and located in the directory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A plugin must be an executable file located in that directory.
```

Filename: /etc/tedge/sm-plugins/docker

```shell

> #!/bin/bash

Reviewer: It is safer to use shell instead of bash as it may not be available on every machine.
```suggestion
#!/bin/sh
```

Author: The first docker example can run by sh, however, the `update-list` example runs only by bash. I copied the script from Christoph's example. Should I rewrite it to sh?

Reviewer: I don't think there is a need to rewrite but maybe just annotate it such that it is clear.

> set -e

Reviewer: This will make the script to return exit code of failed command and this is not what the API spec advices.

You want to use `|| exit 2` on each command to return correct code.

Author: Very good point :)

        fi
        ;;
    remove)
        if [ $# -eq 2 ]; then
                docker rmi $IMAGE_NAME
        elif [ $# -eq 4 ] && [ $VERSION_FLAG = "--module-version" ]; then
            docker rmi $IMAGE_NAME:$IMAGE_TAG
        else
            echo "Invalid arguments"
            exit 1
        fi
        ;;
    prepare)
        ;;
    finalize)
        ;;
    update-list)
        exit 1
        ;;
esac
exit 0

```

> **Info**: the filename will be used as a plugin type to report the software list to a cloud.
> If you name it `docker.sh`, you will see `docker.sh` as a plugin type in cloud.

If you execute `./docker list`, you will see this kind of output.

```json
{"name":"alpine","version":"3.14"}
{"name":"eclipse-mosquitto","version":"2.0-openssl"}
...
```

The Software Management Agent runs executable plugins with a special argument, like `list`.
Let's call the pre-defined argument such as `list`, `install`, and `remove` a **command** here. 
As you can see from this example, a plugin should be an executable file 
that accepts the commands and outputs to stdout and stderr in the defined JSON format. 
Hence, you can implement a plugin in your preferred language.

> > **Important**: the Software Management Agent executes a plugin using `sudo` and as `tedge-agent` user.

Author: I move it to the `list` command as it's the first section that states "The agent calls `sudo /etc/tedge/sm-plugins/docker list`..."

The command themselves and further required arguments must be given as command-line arguments.
The only exception is `update-list`, which requires **stdin** input.

### Output

The **stdout** and **stderr** of the process running a plugin command are captured by the Software Management Agent.

### Exit status

The exit status of plugins are interpreted by sm-agent as follows:
- **0**: success.
- **1**: usage. The command arguments cannot be interpreted, and the command has not been launched.
- **2**: failure. The command failed and there is no point to retry.
- **3**: retry. The command failed but might be successful later (for instance, when the network will be back).

## List

The `list` command is responsible to return the list of the installed software modules.

Rules:

- This command takes no arguments.
- The output must be in [the JSON Lines format](https://jsonlines.org/) including:
  - **name**: the name of the software module, e.g. `mosquitto`.
  This name is the name that has been used to install it and that needs to be used to remove it.
  - **version**: the version currently installed.
  This is a string that can only be interpreted in the context of the plugin.
  

> Given that your plugin is named `myplugin`, then the Software Management Agent calls

Reviewer 2: Might be better not to introduce another plugin name here. I would stick to the `docker` plugin.

```shell
sudo /etc/tedge/sm-plugins/myplugin list
```

to report the list of software modules installed. `myplugin` should output in the JSON lines format like

```json
{"name":"alpine","version":"3.14"}
{"name":"eclipse-mosquitto","version":"2.0-openssl"}
{"name":"rust","version":"1.51-alpine"}
```

with exit code `0` (successful).

> In most cases, the output of the `line` command is multi-lines.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In most cases, the output of the `list` command is multi-lines.
```

The line separator should be `\n`.
This requirement comes from the JSON Lines specifications.

A plugin must return this JSON structure per software module.
In the _docker_ file example, the following command outputs such JSON structures.

```shell
docker image list --format '{"name":"{{.Repository}}","version":"{{.Tag}}"}'
```

## Prepare

The `prepare` command is invoked by the sm-agent before a sequence of install and remove commands.

Rules:

- It takes no argument and no output is expected.
- If the `prepare` command fails,
  then the whole Software Management operation is cancelled.
  
For many plugins, this command has nothing specific to do, and can simply return with a `0` exit status.

In some plugin types, this `prepare` command can help you.
For example, assume that you want to implement a plugin for APT,
and want to run `apt-get update` always before calling the `install` command. 

> In this example, the `prepare` command is the right place to write `apt-get update`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this example, the `prepare` command is the right place to invoke `apt-get update`.
```

$ /etc/tedge/sm-plugins/docker remove name4
```

To make the _docker_ plugin accept a list of install and remove actions,
let's change the file as below.
Note that this example works only in bash.

Filename: /etc/tedge/sm-plugins/docker

```shell
#!/bin/bash

COMMAND="$1"

read_module() {
    if [ $# -lt 2 ]; then
        echo "Missing version or path for sw-module '${1}'"
        exit 1
    elif [ $# -eq 2 ]; then
        mOperation="$1"
        mName="$2"
        case "$mOperation" in
            install)
                docker pull $mName || exit 2
                ;;
            remove)
                docker rmi $mName || exit 2
                ;;
        esac
    else
        mOperation="$1"
        mName="$2"
        mVersion="$3"
        case "$mOperation" in
            install)
                docker pull $mName:$mVersion || exit 2
                ;;
            remove)
                docker rmi $mName:$mVersion || exit 2
                ;;
        esac
    fi
}

case "$COMMAND" in
    list)
        docker image list --format '{"name":"{{.Repository}}","version":"{{.Tag}}"}' || exit 2
        ;;
    install)

>         # We use update-list instead

Reviewer 2: I would

* either `exit 1` to tell this sub-command is not implemented
* or provide an implementation.
